---
title: 'DNS: The Internet's Address Book'
  - ELI5
  - Networking
  - Internet
summary: DNS is like a helpful friend who remembers where everything is, making it easy to find websites by their names.
publishedAt: '2024-04-16'
modifiedAt: '2024-04-16'
---

### ELI5

---

Imagine you have a whole room full of toys. It is very organized, every toy has
a name and there's so many that it can be hard to remember where they all are.
When you want to play with a toy, instead of remembering where each toy is in
the room, you ask your friend. He's very organized and remembers everything, he
tells you exactly where to find the toy you want to play with!

In the world of computers, internet, and networking, there are billions of
websites and each one has a very specific group of numbers called an IP Address,
which is like the toy's name. Instead of trying to remember all those numbers,
we use the Domain Name System or DNS, which is like your friend, to help us find
computers by their names.

So, when you type a website name into your computer like "www.google.com", your
computer asks the DNS, "Hey, where can I find this website?" and just like your
friend, the DNS says "Oh, you can find it at this specific spot", then you
computer knows how to find the website you want!

<br />
<br />
### 101

---

Whether you're navigating the expansive internet or your local network, the
Domain Name System(DNS) plays a critical role in translating human-friendly
domain names into computer-friendly IP addresses, simplifying the way we access
resources and devices.

Imagine yourself in a bustling city, each building with its unique address, much
like websites on the internet with their IP addresses. Just as google maps helps
you find your way, DNS acts as the internet's address book, translating
memorable domain names (like google.com or facebook.com) into the corresponding
IP addresses.

But DNS isn't confined to the global internet alone; it extends its reach into
local networks, like those found in homes, offices, or schools. In these
environments, DNS serves a similar purpose but on a smaller scale.

Within a local network, there's typically a DNS server, often provided by the
network's router or a dedicated server. This local DNS server maintains a
database of domain names and their corresponding IP addresses for devices within
the network.

When a device on the local network wants to communicate with another device by
name, it sends a query to the local DNS server. This server then checks its
database for the corresponding IP address and responds accordingly. To improve
efficiency, DNS servers often cache recent query results, speeding up subsequent
requests and reducing the need to ask other DNS servers for the same information
again.

If the local DNS server doesn't have the requested information (for example, if
a device wants to access a website on the internet), it can ask public DNS
servers on the internet, if they have the answer they will tell the local DNS,
which will tell you. If they don't, they will ask another public DNS server and
continue the chain until resolution.

This local DNS infrastructure not only simplifies the way devices communicate
within the network but also provides a layer of control and security. Network
administrators can customize DNS settings, block access to certain websites, and
ensure efficient resource allocation.

In essence, whether you're navigating the vast expanse of the internet or your
local network, DNS serves as the backbone, seamlessly translating domain names
into IP addresses and facilitating smooth communication between devices.
