---
title: Git: Building Lego Masterpieces and Sharing Them with Friends
tags:
  - ELI5
  - Software Development
  - Collaboration
summary: Git is a version control system that simplifies code management, enables collaboration, and provides a comprehensive history of changes for efficient software development.
publishedAt: '2024-04-22'
modifiedAt: '2024-04-22'
---

### ELI5

---

Imagine you love building amazing things with your Lego bricks. You spend hours
creating cool cars, spaceships, and castles. Wouldn't it be great if you could
easily remember how you built them and share your awesome creations with your
friends? That's where Git comes in!

Git is like a special camera that helps you take snapshots of your Lego projects
at different stages. Every time you add a new piece or change something, you can
take a quick snapshot with Git. These snapshots are stored in a special album,
so you can always look back and see how your project looked at different times.

The best part is that you can share your Git album with your friends! They can
see all the snapshots you took and even add their own pictures of the cool
things they built with their Legos. You can work together on the same project,
taking turns adding new pieces and making your creations even more amazing. And
if someone accidentally breaks something, you can always go back to an earlier
snapshot and fix it easily!

<br />
<br />

### 101

---

Git is a version control system designed for collaboration and isolation on code
projects. Unlike traditional file storage solutions, Git provides a
comprehensive set of features designed specifically for tracking changes,
branching, merging, and facilitating teamwork among developers.

At its core, Git maintains a complete history of all changes made to your
codebase. Each time you make a significant change, you can create a commit,
which serves as a snapshot of your project at that particular point in time.
These commits form a timeline that allows you to track the evolution of your
code, revert to previous versions if needed, and understand how your project has
progressed over time.

One of the key advantages of Git is its branching and merging capabilities.
Branches allow developers to create separate lines of development, enabling them
to work on different features or bug fixes simultaneously without interfering
with the main codebase. Once a feature or fix is complete, the branch can be
merged back into the main branch, integrating the changes seamlessly.

Git's distributed nature empowers developers to work independently and
collaboratively. Each developer has a complete copy of the repository to work
with in their own development environments, allowing them to work offline and
make commits locally. When they're ready to share their code for others to
review and use, they can then sync their changes with a repository in a shared
location such as GitHub or GitLab.

Git's primary solution is to simply manage changes and branching, however
because of it's ubiquitious nature, it has become crucial to DevOps and
automation. It is used in many other ways such as deployment, automation, and
more.
